tom you still awake i'll i'll be honest
i literally had a nap
from nine until 10 p.m it's been a i've
done like
five hours of teaching today so it was
uh i feel i was feeling it so i had a
little one-hour nap and then got back up
and then i did have a chat to tom
earlier and uh
i was complaining about being tired and
i've been sat at my uh computer
sorting out stuff all afternoon and tom
had been what three and a half hours on
the trot of
face-to-face teaching exactly yeah so
before i give too many
i love it i'm i'm complaining i love it
right this is this is what we do as
mathematicians as teachers we love
interacting and teaching our students so
well i've given away some sort of
details about how much work you've done
this afternoon so tell us more
about who you are tom i haven't done any
intro for you i completely forgot to do
that but you know
better than me who you are so tell us
more about your background what you're
up to these days
uh and then we'll do some magic maybe
awesome yeah
um so i'm a mathematician at the
university of oxford
uh in the uk i uh teach the
undergraduate students
and when i'm not teaching i do lots of
maths talks like most of our presenters
um i actually got to do one with a live
audience in september
which i'll be honest i was weirdly
terrified
despite having done several hundred
talks like going six months without
doing one
was it was amazing and i loved it but
also it was
it was kind of like i was really really
nervous i did the same last week first
time in a school for six months and i'm
like
there are real children out there
yeah yeah it was all of course very
socially distanced and masks and
everything um
but i know it was really great to be
back doing something because yeah we've
been doing obviously things like this
online
um and then of course we're not doing
talks i also do
uh online videos so my own channel uh
tomrocksmaths
on uh youtube website tomrocksmaths.com
i even have it tattooed on my arm
so you see you have a number of tattoos
there maybe we should talk about them
later
yeah yeah absolutely um
and and just like ben as well um do some
number five videos from from time to
time which is always great fun so
one this week on um calculating the
blast radius of an atomic bomb
oh yes it was on our list of things we
might talk about but i suspect we have
many things we need to talk about um
so when i spoke to tom earlier you told
me that you don't really
you've never done maths magic is that
true i
i have never in my life attempted a
magic trick of any kind of anything
whether it's
mathematics or not yeah exactly like not
even you know like
i guess quite a lot of people as kids
you get a little play magic set and you
know maybe you put a hat on and have a
one
i have never attempted a single magic
trick at any point there it is
he's got a frog
so so i think that i'm not even sure
well i know why i signed up to do this
because i think it's great i
wanted to be a part of it but i
absolutely do not have a magic trick
but i'm hoping ben as someone with many
magic tricks you might be able to teach
me
let's just have a clara clear here i'll
do the thing on a 24-hour mass magic
show but i don't have magic
i'm just gonna berate you for that for
the rest of your life i think it's
completely fine
and what i said earlier but maths and
magic does go together really well they
seem to be like the idea of
what's going on why does that surprise
me is very matsy as well as magicky but
the art of concealing what's going on is
is kind of the opposite of what you do
in your job of teaching so maybe it's
valid that you uh
you actually make things clear instead
of obfuscating i don't i don't do any of
this to see any of this cloak and
hiding things well um so you asked me to
supply a trick and
i deliberately tom and i had a chat
earlier and tom said don't show me the
trick
now um so that i can do this on you live
and we can have a chat about what it
feels to see a trick for the first time
which is a little bit
you know i thought i was just presenting
the thing but i'm saying well you better
do the thing now the pressure's on me
however i do need your cooperation uh
and if we
do this live uh maybe at the end of our
segment we can
get you to do the trick live for the
having just learnt it maybe
because i will reveal how this works so
if you're up for it
yes no no no this is i'm i'm very keen
to first of all be your volunteer and
more importantly
to do my first ever performance of a
magic trick in my life
i just realized having been taught by
you i i did um
i did promise to blindfold myself at one
point i didn't bring a blindfold with me
so
i'm i'm we're gonna have to trust me but
hopefully if i change my camera
you can see some well-known objects is
that visible
to you okay i can see three blue very
nice blue dice
good and they are live dice i can't roll
them they they should be rolling live
for you is that correct
yes you got a four four and a two
they're good you can even see dots and
numbers good
so i am going to close my eyes uh and
unfortunately this makes it quite hard
to
interact with the dice we might have
some slapstick
if if i was doing this live in person i
would uh ask you to handle the dice but
uh since you don't have the dice there
i'm going to try this so just tell me if
i'm pointing to the right things
uh and help me out by the way my left
and right is confused so that's
on my left is that still left for you
now that's right for you
no as i'm looking that's my right okay
so we're going to get left
this is just the witty banter that i
supply with everything else
sorry banter not witty about it um i'm
gonna shut my eyes now
and tom you're in charge of you don't
tell me what's going on i promise i'm
shutting my eyes and i promise that even
if you think i'm cheating
you could do this without cheating so
i'm gonna roll uh these three dice are
they visible to you
yes i can see three numbers okay can you
add up the three numbers that you can
see don't say anything out loud but make
sure you've got a running total in your
head
is that okay you've done that yeah yeah
it's in my head yes okay
uh i want you to choose one of these i
have no idea where they are is there a
dice near my hand just stop me when you
think
there's a dice nearby yes yes yes okay
do you want me to change for a different
die
yeah let's do that one no no sorry no
yeah pick that one that's fine pick that
one okay
so i'm going to turn this die over and
show you the number on the bottom which
i also don't know because i can't see
anything
uh can you see that number yes can you
add that to your running total
okay so is that replacing the old number
or just now it's just
you have the total and you're adding on
another number which is not visible yeah
and i'm gonna re-roll this die so i
can't i can't know where it ended up so
has that been re-rolled yes and can you
see a number on top of that one
yes add that onto your total as well
please yep
so you now have a running total and i'm
going to open my eyes now because i
didn't see you
let alone which dice got revolved what
the roles were there's no way
i can know you're running total uh which
is interesting because you're thinking
of the number 17.
i mean do you think you give the number
17. that is a relief
okay all right so this is a fun little
dice trick
uh using just three very readily
accessible dice that you can find out in
any board game but
um it's a nice trick it's one of these
tricks that i think uh
when like all magic tricks when you know
how it works you're like oh
well of course but when you don't know
how it works
like all good magic tricks it should be
like what the f fudge
yeah well i i am thinking that but then
that was my initial reaction was
what the as you say and then now i'm
thinking okay so
let's think about what we did like
what's going on i've got some ideas
as to what might be happening perhaps i
tell you what hold those ideas i'm going
to do the trick again a little bit
quicker now and i won't do as much of
the slapstick although i will have to do
it blindfolded and
if you basically you have some
conjectures i think people watching have
sex objectives about what's going on as
well so you can test it out now uh but
you'll see everything obviously
and then we can talk about it and if
you're ready to reverse it then you can
tell me
and i'll roll the dice and you can shut
your eyes and i'm not sure i'm not
confident yet but
we can have a chat about it so i'm gonna
shut my eyes again we'll go quicker this
time right you ready right
yeah yeah yeah let's do it okay i'll
shut my eyes again roll in the dice can
you see three dice on the screen
i can't see three dice yes okay add up
the numbers please
okay all right i'm gonna find one of
them is is wait there's not one there
there's a die there can i use that one
yeah i'm gonna turn that one over
can you see that number uh yeah
add that onto the total yeah and i'm
gonna roll that one again
and add that on to the table okay yeah
are you ready
i think so okay so i i didn't see the
things i didn't see obviously
uh but you're thinking of a number which
is interesting again because your number
is 21 this time
it is 21. that's right i was at one
point it was 17. and then i was like is
this always 17 is this just like raj's
trick where the answer is always the
same thing
but obviously well actually i like about
the mathematic mathematician in you was
conjecturing
you start to see something unusual you
think wait a minute is it no
no it's not that because now you've
found a counter example it's not always
17. exactly yeah
yeah yeah so do you want to ask me any
questions i am going to reveal this
trick since you asked me to and it was
maybe you doing the trick which you're
going to do in a moment
yeah i think i need to know exactly how
it works so i'm going to attempt my
first ever performance well i'm really
glad that you're brave enough to say
i'll try and work this out live without
any preparation so
tell us what you're thinking any any
thoughts okay all right my
so my thought was that the first time we
did this um so i was like okay so we've
got
four rolls um in total yeah no no no
five isn't it because it's the first
three that get added together
then we do the flip and add that and
then we roll again
so there's probably four rolls but what
there's another number coming from the
base yeah
yes yes okay so so there are five
numbers
being added so that's going to mean
a number that's anywhere from five to
thirty so i was just sort of trying to
get my bearings on what the answers
could be so there's that's finite range
right this is
good the bounds i like it i like it
exactly we found the bounds so you you
know you've got it
i wouldn't say a good chance of guessing
the right number but it's not quite as
ridiculous as you know guessing like a
six digit number or something
so that was my first sort of thing when
i was trying to process what's going on
then obviously the fact that at the end
you can see all three numbers that's a
really really that's important
and i think that's a really good thing
for magic sort of analysis is like what
what do they know or what could they
know and what could they not know and it
was true that i couldn't know what you
rolled on one of the dice originally
or the bottom but i do know the last
three you know three
so i was thinking so there are five
numbers you need to know
in to be able to get the final sum you
know three of them at the end
and then you also know something about
the flipping
that took place so even though the dice
that was flipped was then re-rolled
yeah like those oh i think i've got it
because the two numbers oh i got it yes
this is awesome this is this is magic in
a nutshell whenever you
when you know you've got it you know
you've got it because you're like yeah
oh it's that that's what it is yeah so
simultaneously feels lame
and wonderful at least that's my
experience about working at a magic
trick you're like
yes i got it and thank god it's lame
yeah
oh no it's great okay can i can i try it
on you with that please do
and then we'll actually we'll settle it
we'll say it verbally what's going on
afterwards but let's try it
before we uh before we reveal it i mean
a lot of people have got this
i tell you what if you're watching and
you've got this ages going you're
thinking wow tom's
really shouldn't be at oxford it is
amazing how different it feels under
pressure with
millions of people watching on youtube
even if there are millions it is amazing
what doing under pressure
does to you and if you haven't tried
doing under pressure you have no idea
okay also i'd just like to add i think
because i don't do magic tricks
or generally if i'm honest it's not that
i don't like magic it just doesn't form
part of
something i consume in my life so i
think i'm actually at a bit of a
disadvantage because i don't know like
the standard tricks and things
so and the reason is being a
mathematician so
which i think well i think that's what i
really like to do this
slightly reversed version of a magic
trick which is that we get to model what
it feels like to
try and work it out and you're doing
this lovely so i'm going to be the dice
roller but you tell me what to do
okay so i believe to start
i'm not going to look am i right so i
don't look
and then you roll three dice okay i'm
gonna put my dice camera back on
so don't look at the screen anymore i'm
i'm not holding at the screen i've
rolled three
dice all right now you're going to add
up
the total the numbers on those three
dice okay
uh now you're going to select one of
them okay i'm picking one of them
uh you're going to flip it over
okay and then add that number to your
total
okay i've done that and then you're
going to roll again
okay and then add that number also to
your total
okay i think i have a total in my head
you can look all right and i can now
look
okay and i can see okay we've got three
six
six so that's twelve so your total
is nineteen yes it is
yes i thought you were going to say no
just to wind me up then
they contemplated it but that would be
me because you absolutely nailed that i
can't
i can't hear everyone but can we have a
round of applause for tom crawford who
saw a trick cold
figured it out and i know that a lot of
other people on youtube have figured it
out well done you
i can see some non-spoilers going in
remember spoilers don't help anyone
but tom you figured out live on camera
well done tell us the secret and then
i promise i want to talk a little bit
about uh what's written all over the
bits of your body that i can
see yes all right so uh
the way the thing that really helped me
actually i'd sort of talk you through
how i figured it out was
was actually saying there are five
numbers you're adding together
so then it like to me it's then okay so
to know what's going on
the person like the magician needs to
know what these five numbers
are yeah if you know the five numbers
you then know the total
yeah and then when i then realized at
the end you can see three of them
and then of course you don't know the
two that were rolled in between because
you don't know what was on that original
dice
but the flipping trick
you don't need to know what was on it
because the opposite sides of a dice
will always add up to seven stop hold
that thought
there's the key right and there's a fact
that you knew
how did you know that i i didn't know it
i'll be honest it happened in the first
one
and i remembered that it was a six and
then it was a one and then it became a
six
so the very first example we did when i
was you were performing the trick
i saw the one and then the six i was
like okay so and i just remembered what
they were
so my conjecture was do the opposite
sides add up to seven
and then when we did it the second time
i then
it was three and four so then i thought
okay so then the only other
possibilities that are left so four of
the six numbers have appeared on
opposite sides
so therefore it had to be true so i
didn't need to see the third trick
uh but i potentially if the second time
i'd had rolled a one or a six
it may have actually been your data
collection yeah it may have thrown me a
bit because i
i genuinely i don't think i actually
knew in my head that the opposite side
said it up to seven
so let's finish the story here i said it
was the crucial thing
opposite sides of a d6 do add to seven
at least if it's a standard die
it is not uh necessary for that to be
true you could
you could put the number two opposite
number six and you could still make a
die it would still function
in a pretty similar way but people
decided to make dice like this and
you're right opposite sides add to seven
and since they do
why do i only need to know three of the
numbers you just add seven you had those
last three and then you add seven so
you have to check your just test your
mental arithmetic tell you what under
pressure adding seven is difficult
exactly yeah the first time when you
were telling me to keep track of the
total i was like
oh this is a bit late for this like
so i'm curious about why dice have to be
made like that when they don't
well they don't have to be in fact i can
prove they don't have to be here's a
different he's an
octahedral die right uh and the number
four is opposite the number
uh three and it does have opposites not
every shape would have opposites so as
to seven but the number five is opposite
the number six
so they don't add to a constant and uh i
leave it as a source of investigation
to get for anyone out there to
investigate could it have a constant
and if it could why doesn't it been made
like that but that's a sidetrack
i absolutely i've given you a trick
called and you've sorted it out and
you are i'm just really happy i did my
first ever magic trick and also figured
out what was going on
it's also a really easy one to do you
just find three dice and shut your eyes
and
i love it it is dead simple yeah done
presented well it can be a nice trick so
there's a there's a halloween gift to
you
now i wanted to talk to you a bit more
about some non-magicky stuff because
well some more messy stuff because uh
part of what you did
quite a lot um as for your talks was
you you pitched yourself as the naked
mathematician and it wasn't just a
salacious claim
that you were always naked right there
was a reason tell us more about
why exposing bits of your body is
actually a useful way to talk about
maths
well there's two things so the the first
thing was
the the sort of let's call it the
persona of the naked mathematician
came about from uh talking to to lots of
people who
for whatever reason didn't engage with
maths so didn't like it or didn't
refuse to engage with it and a lot of
the feedback as to why that came back
was it's very serious so and that was
something that to me as a mathematician
of course you've got the other things
like it's not for me and the usual
things people talk about but something
that really surprised me was
as a mathematician i'd never considered
my subject to be serious because
we sort of see all of the fun in it and
the beauty and everything else but
the more i thought about it the more i
thought that's
fairly reasonable like i can understand
why some people might have
that opinion and so then i thought well
how can i not make it serious i'll just
do it in my pants
in short so that was kind of where the
the original idea
came from and then it also just so
happens
uh that i actually have uh i think now
eight or maybe nine mathematical tattoos
and so when i now perform as the naked
mathematician two of course
adult audiences should stress this
when i know if i turn up at a school and
start taking because i'm getting
arrested right so
i'm very aware of that yeah yeah i'm
very aware that this is this is aimed at
the older audience
but um so i do a talk where i actually
explain the maths behind
uh my tattoos and sort of whilst i
reveal them during the talk
so it's kind of having a bit of fun it's
trying to show this non how can anyone
possibly take this serious
and also um you can learn a few things
about the tattoos i have
so tell us about some of the tattoos
we've got we've got i reckon five
minutes uh and i know that's not right
but uh no no that's perfect so i'm gonna
tell you about
um this one on my arm up here so
hopefully you can see
the start there i see a letter i think
it's letter e
i mean i can guess that because i can
see the number as well 0.718
something something something so it
wraps around my arm and it ends
right down at the bottom here with three
dots
so okay um it's the first 120 digits
uh in fact of the number e
now um what i want to do to sort of talk
a little bit about this
is actually uh present you with a let's
call it a hypothetical game show
uh then that you seem to have vanished
but i'm going to just keep going anyway
because
i'm still here sorry i didn't mean to
discuss you i wanted people to see see
your tattoo so
i just oh because it needs to be big all
right i get you now i'll disappear
if you want me back just say all right
okay well well i think
so i'll talk as though i'm talking to
ben but i'm talking to the whole
audience
so so this is like ben having taught me
a trick
i'm going to give him a prize and he's
going to have a choice of the prize that
he would like
uh in this hypothetical situation well i
say hypothetical i actually do have the
money to give you
so and again if you want to think about
this yourselves and then just type in
the chat
whether you do abcd then um you know
japan
so um option a is going to be
option a is i will give you three pounds
and i've actually got i'm not skimping
here just to
i've got i've literally got three pounds
so there's two one pound coins to 250
piece
does that pay for the postage to get
them to me as well yeah
right so you have three pounds or
you have another option which is to take
one pound
um and then what i'll do is i will give
you
um one twelfth
interest so whatever total you have the
end of each month
i will add on one twelfth to that and
we'll do that every month for a year
so one pound plus 1 12 in interest
and we'll do that every month okay so 12
times for a
yeah every month right for a year
and then you get the amount that's left
at the end
uh then option c we're going to do
uh the same but now i'll give you 150
second
in interest and obviously you're going
to get that every week now ah okay
cool so you're going to get you're
getting a little bit less
each time because it's a 50 second
instead of a 12 but you're obviously
getting it more often
because you're getting it every week so
52 times and then the final option so
i'm feeling really generous
is uh well am i you don't know yet
i'm high i can do one pound plus one
365th
interest and that's going to be every
day for the year as well
so it's clearly not a leap year and
you're just shortchanging me
or it is a leap year we're assuming yeah
we're assuming the the more common
situation of the non-leap year
fair enough okay so i get to choose one
of these days
yes so you can pick one of these and i
guess the idea i suppose here is that
you would potentially like to maximize
the amount of money you take home
i should say anyone watching not in
britain uh three pounds is like my
entire income these days
do you want your yearly salary ben or do
you want
a slightly a third of it but with some
potential interest
it's tough isn't it because i know that
adding a 12th every month it's like this
is interest this is
a compound interest like i'm going to
get a 12th so i'm going to get 1.12
after the first month i think but then
i've got 12 of that and suddenly my
mental arithmetic is finding it much
harder
yeah and that's going to happen 12 times
or i can have a smaller amount lots and
i i feel like the power of compound
interest
i know it grows so i feel like d i i
want more compoundings i want more
iterations of so i would like to take
option d
i'm a little worried about whether it'll
beat
option a now hold on a second okay
i've gone for d all right we've gone for
d so you're thinking d or a
so i actually like the way you've
explained this in talking about compound
interest because as you say it's a very
powerful
tool um this idea of compound interest
and the fact that as you say
you get 112 so you get 1.1222 but then
you get a 12th of that so that's even
more than the original 12 that was added
so it does begin to build up
as you keep doing this so what we could
actually do is you can figure out what
these
um the formula for these would be so in
part in um
part b or option b what you've got here
is actually
1 plus 1 12
and then that's being multiplied by
itself
12 times so you can write it as 1 plus 1
12 to the power 12.
and then similarly for part c this is
going to be 1 plus
1 over 52 to the power of 52
and then for part d 1 plus 1 over 365
to the power of 365. so now we've got
actual formulas
you can stick these in a calculator and
you can of course figure out what these
numbers are
yeah i'm a bit worried now so
uh if we do this b will give you two
pounds 61.
so you're definitely right not to choose
that that is definitely less than three
pounds
uh c will give you two pounds 69
and d will give you two pounds 71.
wow i'm afraid are they yeah they're
very close so you you had a
complete right way to think about it
just except
it just turned out that this one didn't
quite go more than three pounds
so then the question becomes there's a
pattern here
between these v c and d and you could
you could actually write this
oops so i won't i won't give away
exactly what's happening but what you
can think about
as my final take-home uh sort of
takeaway message for you all to think
about
is to say well what we're doing here
really
is one plus one over n
to the power n so this one is n equals
for option b then it's n equals 52 then
it's n equals 365.
so if i were to say give you interest
every second for a year
or every half second or anything you
want to pick right yeah that would be n
equals 31.536 million
for every second and then you would plug
that number in
and what you would get for every second
is two pounds 71.
which sounds like a number we've
referenced i mean it sounds like my
option
for d uh yeah yeah it's exactly the same
so even so even though it looks like
making it paying it more often is giving
you more money
there's some limiting value so if you
fully do it
the limit as n goes to infinity of this
number
is e which again is the number that's on
my own
2.718 so you can never get you never
quite get to two pounds 72 you're stuck
on two pounds 71 forever because i can't
give you a part of a penny
unfortunately and i remember the first
time i came across the number e
at school i was like that's just another
one of those annoying numbers but then
the surprise
which you've kind of picked up on again
for me here is that it turns up
all over the place which is presumably
why you tattered it on your arm it
wasn't just
just well when people see it they often
think oh is it pie
because you know you see lots of numbers
and an infinite decimal some people in
the chat was like
as an applied i would apply
mathematician i do calculus all day long
calculus e e is like to calculus what pi
is to geometry
and uh yeah and also is this this limit
as well on this kind of growth
lovely tom crawford thank you very much
is there anything else you want to plug
before we leave it because we are
at one o'clock and the next guest is
ready to roll but anything you want to
plug i mean you've mentioned your
website which i think was
tomrocksmaths.com
everything is just uh all i would say is
if um
do you have a look on my website i think
there's now i've almost got a thousand
posts on there
so there's like articles puzzles podcast
videos all kinds
and and if you do want to just have a
chat about maths like just drop me a
message
at tomrocksmaths on instagram twitter
facebook whatever you want um i i like
chatting to people about maths i'll be
honest so
well we'd love chatting to you here tom
thank you so much for getting involved
thank you for being the victim of a
trick instead of performing a trick
thank you for teaching me i'm gonna i'm
gonna use this now i feel like i know a
massive magician this is awesome
it's the beginning of a slippery slope
my friend can we have random applause
from around the country
for tom crawford thank you very much tom
thank you cheers